---+++ Final Issues for GUID-2

The second GUID workshop will take place in just over three weeks time and we need to make sure that we are prepared to discuss and resolve any remaining issues.  The agenda for the meeting has been posted at GUID2Agenda.

Everyone involved in this work is clearly very busy with other commitments, but several of the issues which were identified during the first GUID workshop have received very little subsequent attention.  It may be that these issues are not considered important and that we can ignore them.  I would however urge you all to take this opportunity to provide your input.  For guidance, here is a list of some of the issues concerned:

   1.  LSID minimal standards (LSIDMinimalStandards) - please suggest any additions or modifications to the list of basic requirements which should be met by LSID issuing bodies
   2.  LSID long-term archival AND LSID Orphan Datasets (GUIDOrphanDatasets) - should we plan any central services to support long-term maintenance of data sets for which LSIDs have been issued?  (Unless I hear otherwise, I will assume that this is not considered worthwhile, at least at this time.) 
   3.  Central LSID registration authority (GUIDCentralRegistrationAuthority) - is there value in setting up some proxy services to make it easier for data providers to have LSIDs associated with their data sets (or will this just encourage careless use of LSIDs)? 
   4.  "Publication Bank" (PublicationBank) - has anyone been in communication with the BHL or other projects on any relevant plans they may have? 
   5.  LSID annotation and link-out mechanisms (GUIDAnnotationAndLinkOut) - has anyone done any investigation on this area so as to be able to report at the workshop? 

---++++ Presentations at GUID-2

I would also like to know which attendees at the second workshop would like to make a short presentation of any prototyping work they have been doing, according to the following guidelines:

   1.  Presentation no longer than 15 minutes 
   2.  Must address: 
      a) Class(es) of data covered 
      b) Metadata representation 
      c) Data representation (where appropriate) 
      d) Experience of establishing software stack 
      e) Recommendations from prototype 
         i) General recommendations on LSID implementation 
         ii) Specific recommendations for future LSID implementations for chosen data class(es) 

Please also let me know if you feel able to provide a summary of any discussions on any of the other areas identified as Infrastructure Working Group activities.

Many thanks,

Donald Hobern
GBIF