%META:TOPICINFO{author="LeeBelbin" date="1240192117" format="1.1" version="1.11"}%
%META:TOPICPARENT{name="TdwgName"}%
---++TDWG Motto
We need to develop a short (pithy) motto for TDWG for a banner and for use on TDWG 'stationary' and the web site. Please add or comment on the suggestions below. Comments will need to close April 17, 2009. 

-- Main.LeeBelbin - 31 Mar 2009

---+++Mottos

   1. TDWG - open foundations for sharing biodiversity information
   1. TDWG - liberating information on the world's biodiversity
   1. TDWG - making biodiversity data accessible and useful/usable
   1. TDWG - organising biodiversity data for science and policy
   1. TDWG - saving the planet one byte at a time
   1. TDWG - Ask about our Latin motto competition
   1. TDWG - Easy access to biodiversity data
   1. TDWG - Supporting biodiversity data access and exchange 
   1. TDWG - bringing biodiversity data to life
   1. TDWG - Biodiversity Information Standards  ;-)
   1. TDWG - Biodiversity Information Solutions
   1. TDWG - more biodiversity, less chaos
   1. TDWG - Access to biodiversity data
   1. TDWG - the open forum on biodiversity information [ sharing | exchange | standards | interoperability | integration | synthesis ] (select 0:1) 

---+++Comments and votes
LeeBelbin: I like 5: quirky and memorable, like Qantas

Peter Desmet: 7 & 8 are quotes from Scott Peterson. I like 7. I always introduce TDWG with Richard Pyle's quote: "A group of biology nerds who know a thing or two about computers and computer nerds who know a thing or two about biology", but that's probably too long.

Alex Chapman: I like 9 - it's simple yet has a couple of meanings.  Afterwards I Googled it and found something quite similar attributed to Ed Murdy, in the press release announcing John Wieczorek's 2006 Ebbe Nielsen Prize (see http://www.gbif.org/Stories/STORY1141755620).

Hannu Saarenmaa: I added that #10.  A bit explanation. The current TDWG name really is the motto! Conversely, if we start using a motto on top of what we now use, that will need even more explanation...

If I can comment on the other suggestions, most of them come too close to GBIF's story of "free and open access to biodiversity data for sustainable future".  TDWG needs to differentiate, and be the Open Forum for R&D of Biodiversity Information Standards.

JimBeach: I added #11. I have been reading too much lately about selling "benefits" instead of "features".  Specify fence-sitters look out. Even though it has been somewhat tainted by frequent use in the corporate realm, 'solutions'  appeals to me for TDWG because it conveys the sense of producing useful things (deliverables) that are relevant to bigger problem spaces.  BTW, I think it would be wise to consider the name, the tagline, and the mission statement in one fell swoop, if not changing them all at once, at least making sure the ideas they convey sync and complement.  And just to annoy TDWGians who value process: TDWG's name is "The International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases" and until the Article 8 of the Constitution is invoked to call for a vote of membership on a change to Article 1 of the Constitution, it will remain so. No nomenclatural fiats! :-)

JohnWieczorek: Though I added 12, I like 9.

LeeBelbin: Hannu has a good point, as does Jim. In Fremantle, Donald said we would stick with TDWG, so for the moment, it is "TDWG - Biodiversity Information Standards' rather than the reverse (non-constitutionally) :-)  

StanleyBlum: I agree with Hannu on the need to distinguish ourselves; I think "open forum on biodiversity information X" does that.

LeeBelbin: Thanks to each of you for the inspired suggestions - they were appreciated and informative! I've asked Donald for a decision. In the first instance, we will create two banners for use for the TDWG booth at eBiosphere. The first will be a horizontal one based on 10 and the second, a vertical one based on 11. As soon as I have the proofs back, I'll put the images up on the Wiki for you to see. 