%META:TOPICINFO{author="AnnieSimpson" date="1144444329" format="1.0" version="1.2"}%
%META:TOPICPARENT{name="WebHome"}%
---+++Impatient to learn the Wiki? Click on Main.ThreeEasySteps.

Put user scenarios here, separated by a line. If you are not the originator of the scenario, it should be anonymized unless you have the provider's permission otherwise. 


---


-- Main.BobMorris - 07 Mar 2006


Is your network going to evaluate different technologies to manage the various exotic plants?  Basically, how well can we actually manage any of these exotics?  
See the talk to the US Dept. of Interior on that subject from a couple of years ago, that you can read at http://www.ecoseeds.com/talk.html

[Anonymous]



"A scientist wishes to evaluate the risk of a new scale insect invading New Zealand. He consults GISIN to analyse the expansion in recorded geographical range of the 5 'most dispersive' species over the past 10 years."

[Anonymous]



"Where in the world is phoenix palm listed as invasive and how invasive is it in those places?" [while I appreciate that different countries, regions, and agencies will often have their own ways of classifying the degree to which a particular species is a pest, it would be very useful to get that information along with a definition of the categories as they are used by these agencies. This would really help in allocating resources to dealing with new incursions in new countries by quickly answering the question: how bad might this species become?]

"What are the southern most places where phoenix palm was been described as invasive?" [you could replace phoenix palm with other species, or ask for a northern limit, or ask for where the species is naturalised rather than invasive]

[I use phoenix palm (Phoenix canariensis) as a real example of a species the Auckland Regional Council in Auckland, New Zealand, is currently concerned about and is considering banning from sale.]

[I'll add a general comment that I'm sure has been covered before. At least from a plant perspective, defining a species as invasive is more subjective than defining a species as naturalised. I expect acquiring naturalised plant lists from countries will be more straightforward than acquiring invasive plant lists (here in New Zealand, what plants are invasive (listed weeds) would depend on what agency you were talking with, although it would be great to capture a range of those lists).]

[Anonymous]



"Two local governments in South-east Queensland Australia, have discovered a species not previously recorded in the state (or country) -Dyschoriste depressa - a native of South Africa.  It is apparent that once it establishes in waterways (it's preferred habitat in its country of origin) it is very difficult to treat.  They are contemplating undertaking an eradication program but they need to find out the average seed longevity and germination rate for the species.  GISIN allows a
search of botanists/ecologists in South Africa to contact."

"A new species, Thalia geniculata is found by a catchment coordinator in a waterway in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.	She needs to find out what the most effective control methods are.  GISIN allows a species based search that shows experts in the treatment of that species."

[Anonymous]



"A reviewer looks up GISIN to check if the scientific (Linnaean) name of an invasive species listed in a 15 year old publication is the correct contemporary name, or a synonym / subordinate name."

"A reserve manager requests GISIN to list any reported habitat preference/s for species X in (a) its native region and (b) its invaded location/s"

"A risk assessor looks up GISIN to find if any environmental temperature and salinity tolerance data has been reported for species Y, a suspected brackish water invader."

[Anonymous]



"Traditionally in Canada, the disposal options for infected plant material are either deep burial or incineration. With large amounts of plant material needing disposal in some cases, are other disposal options available?"

"With the discovery of Sirex noctilio in North America, what control options are available?"

[Anonymous]



"For non native plant or animal species X. 
 
1) What is it? 
ID information and distinguishing it from other species (keys or references to keys) and links to flora or fauna references with the species description.
 
2) Where is it? 
Where is it native and naturalized or invasive? Is it problematic in its native range? Distinguish between problems in the more natural and versus human modified ecosystems.
 
3) How do you kill it?
Control methods, including successful and unsuccessful biocontrol. 
 
4) Pathways to introduction or mechanisms of spread. E.g. bird dispersed, wind dispersed, parasite etc
 
Other scenarios.
 
Laws, controls and published articles on the species, but also on herbicides and pesticides."
 
[All of these would ideally be backed with pdf’s of relevant articles.]

[Chris E. Buddenhagen]




"During a rapid assessment in a protected area in Belize, some grasses are found that may be invasive species. It proves impossible to identify them with the botanical keys at hand and there is no time and/or money to send specimens to a specialist abroad. The GISIN network should contain keys and pictures to assist in the identification and verification of these species."

[Anonymous]



"What is the change of distribution range of invasive species X in country/area Y?"
[- the outcome as a time series of maps from the beginning of the invasion to present 
In some cases the interval can be 5 years maybe even less depending on the quality and accuracy of the data.  In some cases the interval can be a decade. 
This could be shown on the screen as an animation, too.  We found following  page very informative: 
http://nationalatlas.gov/dynamic/dyn_zm.html# ]

"Let us imagine that there is a pair of species A and B, which look very similar. One of them is invasive alien species and the other is a 'normal', harmless one.  It might be useful to have some help in the Internet how to recognize these two easily.  You suggested that the species experts could be found but in some cases it might be possible to put the necessary determining tools, plus photos, drawings etc in the net (plus the name of the expert(s), who made the determining tool in this case)."

[Anonymous]

